December 20, 1945. "The NKVD-NKGB Agents in Action. Textbook for Investigators of the Ukrainian Underground Counterintelligence

Top Secret

"NKVD-NKGB Agents in Action". Instruction

Introduction

Although the Bolshevik reality did not bring us any particular surprises, still we, in the practical struggle with the Bolsheviks, met with a number of specific techniques in our work. Speaking of these methods, we mean the practical methods of the NKVD-NKGB organs directed against the UUN as the main danger that threatens the existence of the Bolshevik system. In this connection, to combat the UUN, especially in the western regions of Ukraine, the Bolsheviks threw in large NKVD military forces and organized solid investigative and agent-operative apparatuses in district and regional centers. From the very beginning in the work of these apparatuses we note the extreme activity aimed at the liquidation of all manifestations and signs of the liberation movement in Ukraine. A number of methods of blackmail and mass subtle provocation, justified by practice, came into effect. The success of the struggle against these methods and techniques largely depends on the study of these methods and techniques. On the other hand, a vague orientation in these methods led and still leads to a misunderstanding of the essence of the case and a gross distortion of reality. As a result, in some cases it is difficult to expose and liquidate enemy agents, or revealed agents are liquidated only partially and incompletely. Such facts have already happened in practice. It is especially common in areas where our workers are not sufficiently prepared for such work. They are in maximum contact [so!] with the population, i.e., they have the opportunity to "grasp" various forms and types of NKVD agent work. Despite the fact that these forms and types are largely standard, still, in individual cases, they take on different shades and colors, which our workers must be able to distinguish. The continuous practice of fighting the Bolsheviks and a number of important secret documents seized by our units during the liquidation of various NKVD groups give us an opportunity to know the essence of their methods of work, to make a kind of cognitive-theoretical synthesis of these methods. So, let us begin with what the NKVD-NKGB organs begin their activities in the newly captured areas, i.e., with the organization of an agent network.

1. ORGANIZATION OF AN AGENT NETWORK IN THE DISTRICT.

To know what is being done in every village, in town, in every hut, who says what, what does he do, what he thinks, what can be dangerous, with whom he keeps in touch, with whom he corresponds, with whom he is friends, with whom he visits, etc., etc. - This is by no means the full scope of the work of each district NKVD-NKGB agent-operative apparatus. We are not talking here about ready-made objects, as they call them "figurants" [sic!], i.e., people who are already being developed by special agents of the NKVD-NKGB, but about the continuous search among the grey mass of "happy" citizens of the Bolshevik "paradise" for new objects, which in the past were or are still in opposition, or, because of their past and connections, may in the future be in opposition and be harmful to the Bolshevik state.

The few dozens of NKVD-NKGB staffers in the district apparatus, as a result of their small number and lack of direct contact with the population of the district, are unable to cope with this work. To help themselves, in each village they secretly organize a special agent information network of the civilian population. Only after the creation of such a network in each settlement, the NKVD-NKGB bodies begin their activities. With the help of this network, they are able to monitor the internal life of each settlement, to identify and "develop" objects that will be of a certain operational interest to them. The main provision that the Bolsheviks adhere to in the organization of the agent network is mass, another thing is that during a long stay in the districts they also select high-quality agents, but still, the basis is the quantity. On average, it takes one month to organize an agent network in a new district. With the establishment of such a grid, the area is considered secured, the basis is the quantity. On average, it takes one month to set up an agent network in a new area. Once such a grid is created, the area is considered secured. On the territory of the Western regions of Ukraine, after their second coming /spring and summer of 1944/, the Bolsheviks retained most of their old agents left after the first occupation period. These agents were partially liquidated during the German occupation, but a considerable part of them, which had been well concealed in the past, remained undiscovered. Important archives of the district and regional centers of the NKVD-NKGB were almost all taken out or well hidden. The NKVD used these archives to resume contact with the old network of agents after their return. Due to the lack of safe houses, the resumption of the NKVD conducted this contact at military committees during mobilization, during school inspections, in district financial departments, district health departments, district executive committees, during teachers' conferences, etc. Practice has established and confirmed by documents that the NKVD-NKGB bodies make maximum use [so!] of various district circles and organizations, which, at first glance, should have nothing to do with this institution, to meet with their agents. So, the extremely quick orientation of the NKVD-NKGB apparatuses in our movement is explained by the fact that they immediately, after arriving in the districts, contacted their old agents and received full-fledged data from them. From secret materials which we seized it is clear that every agent who was purposely left in the territory occupied by the Germans or remained due to various reasons of private nature, after the return of the Bolsheviks gave us a detailed written report on his work for the entire period of the occupation. This work had the character of permanent observation of the persons who went to work for the Germans and the persons who took part in the nationalist movement. The actions of these persons, their connections and relationships with others were carefully recorded by agents. In addition, all internal political and civil events of the area were recorded with detailed descriptions of them and the persons who took part in them. These agents, which they called "permissible", recruited during peacetime, were the most qualified. Immediately after contact with these agents is re-established, the NKVD-NKGB organs make preparations to expand the agent network, i.e., recruit new agents. This preparation includes:

1. Selection of a candidate.

2. The purpose of the recruitment.

3. Comprehensive study of the candidate.

4. Collection of compromising [sic!] material.

5. Personal acquaintance.

In peacetime the above items are given a lot of time and attention /for example, a comprehensive study of the subject, his activities and communications can last several months/, but in wartime these operations are greatly reduced. Let us briefly explain each of them:

1. CANDIDATE SELECTION. This includes a superficial acquaintance with a set of circumstances and characteristic features of the object, which in the future may have a permanent influence /positive or negative/ on the quality of performance of special tasks, which characterize his ability to this work in general. This refers to year of birth, nationality, education, place of residence, profession, marital status, social background, political convictions, as well as certain traits of character, aptitudes, tastes, and much more. This data is collected with the help of existing agents outside the knowledge of the target.

2. PURPOSE OF VERBALITY. This is a precise definition of the nature of the agent's work, tasks, and responsibilities. Depending on the above circumstances and the characteristics of the subject, he may be recruited to work, to a certain kind of agency activity. The main thing here is the relationship of the "object" to the personality of the "figure" or to the organization, which is to become a "development" or deconspiracy. For example - friendship, acquaintance, neighbourhood - when the identification or development of the "figurant"/one person/ is going on - and belonging to the organization, or hostile attitude to it - when there is a question of its exposure.

3. COMPREHENSIVE STUDY OF THE TARGET. This is the longest period of preparation for the recruitment of an agent. During this process, a detailed study is made of the candidate's past activities, family, acquaintances, and connections. For some time, with the help of external surveillance agents, all his movements are recorded (visits to relatives, acquaintances, friends, theater, cinema, restaurant, controlled correspondence, overheard telephone conversations, etc.). Additionally, all information about him received undercover are checked and verified.

4. COLLECTING COMPROMENT [sic!] MATERIALS. In order to be sure that the proposed cooperation with the NKVD-NKGB bodies, the selected candidate will not reject, and in order to force her to conduct active informant work, all materials and data, which at least to some extent compromise [sic!] this candidate, are collected.

Later, in a conversation with this candidate, the investigator cautiously hints to her that all this material can be kept secret if the subject agrees to the cooperation offered to him. Otherwise, he /the investigator/ will give these materials a certain turn. Of course, the more compromising materials, the more the NKGB-NKGB gets its hands on the victim. But we will talk about this specifically below.

5. PERSONAL ACQUAINTANCE. The last phrase [so!] in preparation for the recruitment of an agent is a personal acquaintance of the investigator with him. During this period, during the conversation, the investigator checks and clarifies all the data collected by the agent, and also obtains new data, which are important in the recruitment. This mostly refers to individual character traits of the subject, the presence of which can be ascertained only after a long and attentive conversation. It should be borne in mind that such a conversation is not of the nature of a question [sic!] of an object, and its subject is not his biographical data or connections, but most is a conversation of a private nature on various, quite extraneous subjects. In such a conversation one can learn many important traits of a person's character without giving him the opportunity to be guided about the reasons for such an audience. This concludes the preparation for recruiting an agent. A set of the above collected materials and a personal acquaintance with the subject enable the investigator to orient himself correctly and make a decision regarding recruitment. If the object turned out to be a suitable candidate, the recruitment plan and methods begin immediately. If the candidate is not suitable and the collected compromising material is sufficient, the object is arrested and prosecuted.

The proprietary methods of recruitment mostly consist of three parts:

1. The subject's self-disclosure - testimony about himself.

2. Filing material compromising [sic!] another person (or other persons).

3. Submission of one's connections.

Unexpectedly discouraged by the investigator's full familiarity with the compromising [sic!] material, the subject is forced to give truthful testimony about himself. This in the recruitment process is the main thing - the basis on which everything else is based. Submission of materials about the activities of others goes on without much difficulty. The same can be said of the filing of one's connections. This is basically how the most common method of recruitment into the NKVD-NKGB agent network looks like, the method that the NKVD-NKGB most uses in its work.

Here we have considered only one of the types of Bolshevik agents and methods of their recruitment, i.e., blackmail. In addition to this, there are several other types of agents, among which the main ones are paid and ideological agents. During the recruitment of these agents very different methods and techniques are used, although the nature of work is the same: for example, if in any institution, organization or enterprise it is necessary to have an agent, and there is no appropriate candidate, which could be used for blackmail, then the employees of the same institution, organization or enterprise are selected a person inclined to various vices or passions. The special agent makes a close acquaintance with this person and, for a certain period of time, as a "friend" assumes all the costs associated with the satisfaction of his vicious needs (drinking, playing cards, etc.). ), and so, on the one hand, for a certain period of time, the object, accompanied by his new "friend", develops his vices, and, on the other hand, falls into material dependence on him, having a weak character, he sinks lower and lower every day, until at the appropriate hour the agent offers him material assistance for a certain job. Then comes the acquaintance with the responsible operatives of the NKVD-NKGB, who finally recruit him for a fee for information work. This type of agents consists mainly of degenerate people, capable of all kinds of crimes and by its number is not the last among other types of agents.

As for the ideological agency, in short, it consists of communists and Komsomol members who, by virtue of their political convictions, voluntarily engage in agent work. But the benefit of such agents is insignificant, because ordinary citizens are afraid of such types and never sincerely express their thoughts before them. Nevertheless, in Galicia such agents played the significant role because the considerable quantity of the communized element lived in the villages during German occupation and looked after our movement in disguise and when Bolsheviks came, they escaped to the cities where they came to the bodies of NKVD and after telling everything they knew they offered their services.

Several cases and secret orders of NKVD-NKGB organs testify that beside above-mentioned kinds of agents, the special type of agents created from under-aged children (children of 12-14 years old) are organized and functioning in Galicia. These children are caught during raids and taken to NKVD-NKGB district departments under various pretexts, during interrogations threatening them with death, if they do not tell, in whose houses are quartered Banderites, who in the village cooks them food, where are their stores, who is stanitsa, where is communication and other. Given the exceptional mass character of our movement, many children in the villages can indeed answer some (if not all) of these questions, for they are mostly observant and have a good memory at that age. This is taken into account and used by NKVD workers. Having received the necessary information from such a child, the NKVD workers stroke him on the head and begin to pamper him, praising him, telling him various tall tales, promising that they will send him to military school, give him weapons, that he will be a pilot, a commander, etc. Usually a child of this age cannot perceive everything critically, it seems to him that the "vuyko" - the man in yellow shoulder straps - is really kind, he says the truth. In conclusion, this "vuyko" gives him a few hundred rubles in cash and lets him go home; before saying goodbye, he convinces the child not to tell his parents about it, because they will take the money from him and beat him up. Such a child is kept for no more than one day and is released due to the lack of compromising [sic!] materials. We have already registered cases when such kids received money and watches (of low value, though) and did a great harm to our movement. When caught and detained by the NKVD organs, such agents quickly confess, often without understanding the full extent of the crime committed. Nevertheless, the NKVD-NKGB agencies continue to recruit and use such agents. It is now known that such a network exists in every settlement, and the Security Service must take this into account and carry out appropriate countermeasures (identify all underage detainees and thoroughly check them).

2. VERTICAL CONSTRUCTION OF THE AGENT NETWORK.

Up to this time, when speaking about the NKVD-NKGB agents, we everywhere, when defining the persons recruited for informational work, called them agents. In fact, the word "agent" has its own specific definition and means only one special type of informer with the appropriate level of practical training. This will become clear to us when we consider the vertical construction of the NKVD-NKGB agent network. In reality, such a grid consists of: residents, agents, and secret informants. Let us begin with the former.

1. RESIDENTS. This is the most qualified and trained type of informant, who directs the work of a group of agents and informants. An element who went into informer work out of an idea or out of a love of "art" enjoys great confidence in the NKVD organs. He, like every operative, has consperative [sic!] apartments in which, according to a strict schedule, he meets with his agents and selects from them the materials collected. He usually has his permanent residence in the city and does not directly participate in the informational work, except in isolated cases.

During consperative [sic!] appearances, he teaches agents or informants (one at a time, of course) how to write reports, how to collect and ascertain materials, keep secrets, and gives specific tasks for the time until the next meeting. Each of his subordinate agents knows only his pseudonym. On the other hand, a specially worked out schedule of appearances ensures that each agent or informant, one before the other, is conspirated. The resident himself is contacted [sic!] in his work and is subordinate to an operative of the NKVD-NKGB and receives all instructions from him. Residents sometimes find capable agents to take their place, and they themselves go to a legal position in the NKVD-NKGB operative apparatuses. In one of our districts such a resident was found by chance and detained, but due to incomplete interrogation he was liquidated after giving insignificant and unimportant materials. The weak orientation of the investigator in these matters led to the fact that the detainee during the investigation was not identified as a resident, but only as an informer, and was liquidated. A few days later we determined that he was a resident, but it was too late. We must remember that a resident does not work himself, but is connected with part of the NKVD-NKGB network, and the network, depending on the area, can cover up to 10 settlements. When interrogating a resident, one must pay attention to exposing his subordinate agent network. On the other hand, when interrogating an agent or an informant, to establish in detail their connections. Very often, as a result of the agents' confession, it is possible to get on the resident's trail, to discover his conspiratorial [sic!] apartment or place of appearances. With normal and complete interrogation, the liquidation of each resident should entail the liquidation of the part of the agent network subordinate to him.

On the territory of the Western oblasts of Ukraine, the Bolsheviks organized their residency almost exclusively from Nadneprovskaya employees, who occupy official positions in various departments and institutions (district council employees, school inspectors, school principals, teachers, mill managers, threshers, etc.). In the secret orders of the Stanislavsky Regional Directorate of the NKVD-NKGB it is strictly forbidden to conduct recruitment of the resident from the local population. However, individual cases are not excluded.

2. AGENTS. The most colorful type of snitch out of the entire agent network are, in fact, agents. The fact is that it is necessary to distinguish strictly between agents-agents-informants themselves and residents and informants-informants-informants. Between these types, as we shall see below, there is a significant difference. An agent, like a resident, is a sufficiently trained type of informant who can independently perform important tasks and be detached from his superior (operative) for a significant period of time. There are many kinds and types of agents, but here we will consider only those that the NKVD-NKGB organs use most [sic!] in the fight against the Ukrainian movement. The main thing in which any agent differs from
 of the secret informer, is that the agent is always tasked with sneaking inside [sic!] our organization or into any UPA unit and being an equal member among us, behaving in such a way as to gain the trust of his leader, guide, or individual UPA commander. Such trust is won by an agent's "extreme activity" directed against our enemies - this "activity and devotion" to the common cause often blinds and confuses even highly conscious and responsible workers. Such agents, once infiltrated, remain in our midst until they have accomplished their tasks. According to the nature of these tasks and the nature of the agents' activities, they can be divided into four main groups:

1. the INVESTMENT AGENTS, who have the specific task of infiltrating our milieu with the purpose of:

a) in the OUN: to discover the locations of OUN leadership cells and individual guides, to learn from them their real names and places of birth, about the locations of bunkers with property, about stanitsa, connections, and many other things on which we rely in our work.

b) In the UPA units: studies of subdivisions, command and numbers, armament, ammunition stocks, plans of action for the future, places of permanent cantonments of outposts and stays during stops, the question of food and clothing, etc.

These agents, in turn, are divided into short-term and permanent. The first, after performing specific tasks, go to their supervisors, who transfer them to perform similar work in other areas, while others, who have covered with their actions a certain area, arrange for themselves to go "to work" in other areas or other units. Such transitions are usually motivated by reasons that do not arouse any suspicion. About the ways of contact of agents with their supervisors we will consider separately.

AGENTS-PROPAGANDISTS are sent into our ranks by the NKVD-NKGB in order to spread Bolshevik propaganda and to undermine morale, especially in UPA units. They, at the same time as shouting patriotic phrases, sigh, talking about the "futility" of our work, the moral decline, the strength of the Bolshevik power, the successes at the fronts, etc. They especially exploit [so!] the defeat of our units, criticizing the actions of their leaders and praising the tactics and omnipresence of the enemy. By their actions they seek to create an oppressive, panicked mood. They also spread versions about the humane treatment by the Bolsheviks of those who come to them voluntarily, and about the guardianship of our wounded who are taken prisoner by them. This is spreading not only among the UPA riflemen, but also among the civilian population during the standing on the apartments. Usually, such versions do not find a corresponding ground among our shooters, but still, some of the shooters become demoralized over time, and when they find themselves in a difficult situation, they lose courage faster. So, the spreading of these versions also needs to be paid attention to by our bodies, especially since the beginnings of them are often easy to find if one takes a close interest in the matter.

3. TERRORIST AGENTS: Since the end of 1944 we have recorded several cases involving the actions of terrorist agents. These agents on purely specific assignments to eliminate highly authoritative OUN guides or talented UPA commanders. Before receiving an assignment, a terrorist agent undergoes training in the form of a special briefing, the nature of which depends on the conditions under which the attempt will be made (on whom, when, where, in what way, etc.). One such agent, detected by our agencies, confessed that before becoming a terrorist he had spent several months as an ordinary informer, but for his active work and personal abilities he quickly received an "advance" and was promoted to agent. After some time, one of the NKVD-NKGB operatives began to meet him more often and have conversations on various topics, including private ones. Several times they drank vodka together and went to "divchat".

The operative saw him as a suitable candidate for a terrorist agent. In this connection he gradually and cautiously began to prepare the ground. In his conversations he often drew attention to the great importance of the Bandera men in leadership positions. He said that with the death of such individuals the UUN or the UPA would lose more than with the liquidation of the entire military "vidil. Once the operations officer suggested in a friendly conversation with agent "A" (as they conventionally called him) that he made an attempt on the life of one of the most authoritative commanders of the UPA. "A" agreed. It was decided that he would persuade four more people from the same village to go underground (they were persecuted by the NKVD for cooperation with the Germans) and together with them sneak into the "viddil", headed by the above-mentioned commander. The four fellow-villagers [sic!], whom he persuaded to go into the underground, were picked up for camouflage. On leaving he received from an operative the 2nd
 grenades and a rifle, with which he presented himself to the cell that sent new arrivals to the UPA unit. During conversations with him, our worker noticed that "A" was confused and unnaturally agitated. His confusion and excitement, on repeated and more careful conversation, betrayed him. When asked about the weapon he had brought with him, he began to give unsteady and confused answers. He was immediately taken in for questioning, where he was completely confused and had to confess. Terrorist "A" had the task of sneaking into Commander "R"'s hundred and, choosing the appropriate moment, shooting him with a rifle, and if he was surrounded by other commanders, throwing two grenades at him. The time to accomplish this task was given one month. After committing the assassination, the terrorist was to escape and report to his supervisor. The legend about the reasons for joining the underground was well thought out and developed, and was calculated to be a mass phenomenon (during the interrogation he repeated that he joined the underground in order not to join the Red Army).

4. Among the other types of agents one may encounter in one's practice are apartment agents and agents of external surveillance. Both the former and the latter are used by the NKVD-NKGB organs solely to develop individual figurants. In this case, an agent-apartment-keeper attaches himself to a "figure", establishes a "friendship" with him, often visits his apartment, scrutinizes family ties and listens to what is being said. Later, he receives from his supervisor (the investigator) a specific subject, often of a provocative nature, which he must talk about with the "figure. The reactions of the "figure" during conversations with him are the main object of the agent's observation. The agent records his conversations in as much detail as possible and passes them on to the investigator in writing at regular intervals. Such "development" in peacetime, depending on the person of the "figure", will last from 1.5-2 months to a year or more. At the same time, the agent-investigator may be replaced over time, attaching another to the same object; the old agent is transferred to another "job" (sometimes transferred to another company). These days in Galicia such agents are used [sic!] to "work out" priests, teachers, directors of various institutions, and others who hold official positions.

In turn, agents of external surveillance, for the most part, do not come into contact with their objects, they are not internally developed, but only watch and record all their movements for a certain period of time. It is clear that the object being watched must not know anything about this. Later, at the interrogation, using these materials, the investigator quickly disarms the subject, letting him know that the investigators know everything. Agents of external surveillance are mostly used [sic!] in large cities. There they have all types of transport at their disposal, (railroads, cars, motorcycles, bicycles, etc.) and at times travel hundreds of kilometers in pursuit of the target.

Most external surveillance agents are used [so!] in metropolitan cities and in railway transport, where very often they wear the uniform of railway workers and perform the duties of railway employees. During this period, in our area, such agents may be used [sic!] as an exception.

3. INFORMANTS.

Secret informers are the most numerous and the most dangerous kind of informers for us. They are the kind of "mosquitoes" that cover the healthy body of our organization on all sides. From this agency we have suffered and now suffer the greatest losses. It frightens us not with any special methods or subtlety of work, but only with its mass character. In a relatively short period of time the organs of NKVD-NKGB have woven such a dense net of informers in each village, that all manifestations of our movement are covered by it. As we are destroying it, they are expanding it every day. As opposed to the agents, the informers do not have the task of infiltrating any UPA military unit into the OUN. They have nothing to do with the UUN. They live in their homes, with their families, and at the same time they monitor our movements: when, how many and where our troops pass through the village, what kind of weapons they have, where they lodge, where they take food from, who cooks them food, where they stay, whether there are leadership cells in the village (if there are, what and where they lodge), where there are bunkers with OUN property, who in the village is a pack leader, messenger hut, scouts, messengers, civil guards, paths that you can take around outposts - this is approximately the scope of work of an ordinary secret informer. Very often, such an informer not only informs about everything in detail, but even himself, disguised in Soviet clothes and with a bandaged face (so as not to be recognized), leads the enemy troops to the village by hidden paths. If we consider that in such a village there are at least 5 such informers, their importance becomes clear.

The main source from which the NKVD-NKGB constantly feeds materials to replenish its "cadres" is our villages. The method is the same - the ludolovs.
 All those detained during raids are taken to the NKVD-NKGB for "filtration". After this "filtration," one of three decisions awaits the person: first - to be shot, second - to be released as an agent (informer), third - to be released.

Let's make it short: only those members of the UUN, shooters and commanders of the UPA, who did not tell anything about themselves or other persons during the interrogation, are liquidated. They recruit for cooperation the ordinary members of OUN, UPA shooters, and some technical staff of OUN, who fully confessed during the investigation and gave compromising materials about other persons and their connections.

The release, and only in isolated cases, of persons who have nothing to accuse them of and on whom there is no compromising material. In addition, it should be taken into account that the OUN members recruited by the NKVD-NKGB organs, or gunners (rarely junior commanders) of the UPA are given tasks to return to our ranks and tell a specially prepared legend about their escape, or another fabulous release, to work as agents-interns. At the same time, the average villager, having told everything he knows about our movement, is framed as an informer, without an assignment to infiltrate our ranks. Every person who has to conduct an investigation must keep these circumstances firmly in mind, and be guided by them in his work.

The large masses of people, which the NKVD-NKVD organs pass through their filters daily, force them to work in an extremely standardised manner when recruiting. This standardization makes our work easier, simplifies it, although it makes it somewhat one-sided. But we will talk about this further. Getting a detained person to confess about himself, given [sic!] solid compromising [sic!] facts (military uniform, found weapons, ammunition, baton, trident, desertion [sic!] from the Red Army), is the easiest thing to do. And when there is a confession about oneself, then by the method of "contrasting arguments" further treatment of the object is conducted, a person is drawn in parallel the punishment of death and the joy of life, the extent of one's guilt before the fatherland and the possibility of being free, our weakness and our power, and other things to induce him to cooperate. In addition, in order to be sure that the subject will not reject the offer of cooperation, and when released will not run away, but will work for them - threaten his family, which should be responsible for him. So, the main method of recruiting NKVD-NKGB agents is blackmail.

It is clear that only a crystal-clear, courageous and high-minded man, can endure torment and sacrifice his life and that of his family for the good of the cause. The rest of the people, as practice has shown, fall away.

We have already said above that the main mass, from among whom the NKVD recruits the greatest number of agents, is the organized people - i.e., the underground and those who are hiding from the Bolsheviks on their own account. It is known, however, that the NKVD-NKVD does not limit itself to this, but sends agents into our ranks from people who work legally in various Soviet institutions (district executive committees, district financial departments, village councils, schools, etc.). Most of these people are recruited as informants (especially teachers in villages and employees of village councils), while others are developed and formalized using the above described methods of recruitment as agents-interns. The latter are selected from persons who, as a result of their past activities or connections, are "politically suspicious" from the NKVD-NKGB point of view. Such a person is secretly summoned to the NKVD-NKGB (without being arrested) and their "cards" are revealed to them, they are made an agent and forced to go into the "underground". A few days after this "escape", the family of this agent is arrested and "taken to Siberia", in reality to another district, and the house is burned down.

The agent suddenly appears in our ranks as a "victim" without arousing any suspicion and quickly finds an appropriate place to "work". It is known that a considerable number of such people went underground in November and December of last year - that is, during that period when the greatest number of organized people, who did not believe that it was possible to endure the winter in the conditions of Bolshevik reality, were falling in spirits. We are not hereby claiming that all people went underground with enemy intent, but only drawing the attention of the Security Service organs to these factors in order to increase our political vigilance.

The recruitment of each agent or informant always ends with his or her formalization - i.e. submission of a handwritten curriculum vitae and filling out - and signing a special questionnaire that obliges him or her to cooperate. In this questionnaire, in addition to the biographical data of the agent-informant, his pseudonym under which he will work is written down. Agents, who are recruited by the NKVD-NKGB district departments on the basis of complements (by blackmail), are approved in the regional NKVD-NKGB Department, where all materials are sent that explain the reason and nature of recruitment (a special report of an operative on the purpose of recruitment, a protocol of consciousness of the recruited, his autobiography and recruitment
 questionnaire). Depending on these materials, the Regional Directorate approves the recruited person or, in case of insufficient material or incomplete awareness of himself and his connections, returns all materials to the district in order to postpone the recruitment and make a record on the object.

In some cases, the registration of agents does not take place immediately, but after the object has justified itself in practice, i.e. has performed several assignments. In this connection, we may encounter cases when an object released from arrest will be engaged in informational work, but will not have an alias and will not sign the obligation to cooperate. The NKVD-NKGB practices this because in many cases recruited and official agents or informants, after their release and assignment, voluntarily come to our agencies and never return to the NKVD-NKGB.

The NKVD-NKGB "reserves" its active agents from mobilization into the Red Army. Regarding this, there are special top secret orders of regional NKVD-NKGB departments, which suggest "reserving" from the army only those agents or informants who proved extremely active in their work (of course - in denunciations) and who could be used for a long time in the future. The rest of the agents, especially those who have not proven themselves in "work," or who are suspected of duplicity (working for both sides) or of "treason," are not provided with armor.

The above mentioned secret informants who track and report on our movements in the population centers. In addition to these, there are so-called "raiding-informants," i.e., those who have as their object of work neighboring or even distant settlements. There are many such villages (especially in the mountains) where the NKVD-NKGB, as a result of the great activity of our movement and our countermeasures, is not able to organize an appropriate network of agents. Formed agents are neutralized by our bodies even before they start working. So, in this case, under various pretexts, informers from other settlements are sent to such villages. Fitted with sacks, they "exchange" salt for bread, "buy" a cow or a horse, "sell" various small deficit goods (stones, matches, paste), "visit" relatives (if any), acquaintances and much more. At the same time, they observe in which apartments and how many of our troops are quartered, where the outposts are, etc. We must also pay attention to such people and check them carefully.

3. WAYS OF CONTACTING THE NKVD-NKGB ORGANS.

One of the interesting and important points in the work of the agents is the way in which the agents-informants contact their superiors. In peacetime, there are a number of safe houses in each city for this purpose, where agents regularly meet with their supervisors, pass them the materials collected (always in written form) and receive new assignments. These apartments are always selected in the most populated part of the city and visited by operatives dressed in civilian clothes, and after 2-3 months they are changed for conspiratorial reasons.

Each operative draws up a schedule for the next month of visits to these apartments by his informant agents and passes it on to the heads of the department.

The latter, with such a schedule in hand from each operative, makes appropriate adjustments to prevent two agents from meeting at the safe house so as not to discredit them in front of each other. In addition to business meetings, there is a kind of training of agents at these apartments, which is conducted by the operative during the reception of the agent. We will not discuss this training in detail, but we will only establish that it consists of covering such matters as:

1. Conspiracy in the work and appearances-"meetings."

2. Discipline in appearances (accuracy of meetings according to the schedule).

3. Education of agents (political conversations to raise the political level of an agent).

4. Strictness in work.

5. Reporting (specificity, accuracy, timeliness, etc.).

In modern conditions, safe houses exist, but in smaller numbers. In addition to conspiratorial apartments there are such methods of contact:

1. Meeting in an agreed place (this can be an empty house, in a drop box, military recruitment office, village council, canteen, theater, etc.). At first glance, it looks like a safe house, but in reality it is not, because a safe house is a permanent place of meetings for a certain period of time with the appropriate equipment (different clothes, means to change the face, etc.), and the meeting at the school or village council is a one-time, where the place and time of the next meeting is planned, which will already occur in another place (the military recruitment office or district financial department).

2. agents-informants leave agency material in a pre-arranged place (in a hollow tree, under a rock, under a cross, etc.).

3. Transmitting data with the help of a third person (father, mother, brother, sister, wife, etc.);
 When an agent or informer is unable to leave his unit or apartment and have direct contact [so!] with his superior, he confesses to someone in his family and warns him that if he betrays the secret, he and his entire family will be destroyed.

Such a third person is most often chosen as a person who can visit various places without arousing suspicion (fair, hospital, school, etc.).

This same person often visits the agent in the unit (combat unit), brings him laundry, sustenance, etc., and picks up materials prepared for transfer. This is a very subtle and widespread method of contact, which must be resolutely combated by banning all "meetings and visits" in riflemen's units with their relatives and acquaintances.

4. Transmission of statements through the mail is the simplest method: the material is sealed in an envelope with the NKVD-NKGB address and belongs to a post office box. If there is no such box, then a third person is also used who takes the envelope to the city box. By the way, our organs have already intercepted such denunciations [sic!] several times and have tracked down [sic!] the hapless "authors" by the letter.

5. Meetings during raids and sweeps of the area. Operational apparatuses of the NKVD-NKGB widely use for contact with their agents raids and sweeps of districts (settlements), which they regularly conduct several times a month. NKVD-NKGB operatives travel together with the troops (who conduct these raids) to visit the apartments of their agents (informants) and receive the collected materials. This can take place even when the agent or informer disguises himself by fleeing from the Bolsheviks along with our people, but in this case he leaves the material in a pre-arranged place, in his hut. Then the operative-worker finds it himself.

6. Contact through a resident. The number of informants scattered through the villages of the district is so large that the district operative apparatuses do not have time to maintain direct contact with them.

The secret orders for the NKVD-NKGB district departments suggest that a certain part of the informant network be placed under the "guardianship" of the Resident Office. Indeed, we have enough cases where informers, as well as agents, after their release from arrest no longer meet with those who recruited them, but pass on news to various mill managers, threshers, school directors and inspectors, teachers, village council workers and others, i.e. "residents." This method of contact is used both to relieve the district operative apparatus and to conspire the work of secret informants, for relationships with the above persons are not suspicious. For greater conspiracy, these relationships are maintained by the above-mentioned third parties.

4. ADVICE TO THE INVESTIGATOR.

Our investigative agencies in practice have to deal with the most important investigative processes of their nature. These are processes in which it is necessary to establish facts without the help of witnesses, without [so!] compromising [so!] material and compromising [so!] circumstances (the release of an object from arrest cannot always be taken as a compromising [so!] factor).

Conducting an investigation when the subject is preliminarily developed, when there is a "mountain" of compromising material and witnesses, is not difficult. Sitting behind a desk in a quiet office, with a large number of agents, telephones and 3-4 months to conduct one case - it's not difficult. But to interrogate a man released after a two-week stay in the NKVD-NKGB in two to three hours is a very difficult case. One often hears voices among our collaborators stating that there are extraordinary specialists-investigators in NKVD-NKGB apparatuses, from whom we must learn a great deal, that they have special interrogation methods, unknown to us, etc. In reality, this is not the case. It was determined that in the NKVD-NKGB regional departments, there are semi-literate people, who, because of their lack of development and education, are not able to understand and master the investigation processes. They are mostly operative, not investigative workers, and the NKVD-NKGB district departments are also more operative than investigative apparatuses.

It is another matter that the regional NKVD-NKGB departments have investigators with appropriate education and development, but even they would not be able to "open America" for us in the conditions of our work.

The NKVD-NKGB agencies do not arrest an object until they have worked it out undercover, that is, until they have collected some compromising materials; once arrested, they can supplement this data and detain the object as long as necessary. We, on the other hand, have to detain individuals, often motivated by inaccurate suspicion or the fact that they have been released from custody. And that's it. But in this case, although it is paradoxical, it is the NKVD-NKGB working methods themselves that help us, namely, their standardization and stamping of the recruitment of agents.

